\chapter{Filesystem Encryption Boundaries}
\label{ch:ecryptfs}

\section{Overview} 
With Android 4.0 (Ice Cream Sandwich or ICS), Google introduced native support for full-disk encryption. Ice Cream Sandwich encrypts
the entire \texttt{/data} (see chapter \ref{ch:forensics}) partition with \texttt{dm-crypt}, which provides transparent block-level
encryption, sitting in-between the filesystem and the device. From a privacy perspective, introducing block-level encryption is a
significant step forward for Android because it makes offline attacks against a mobile device much more difficult; the data is
locked away securely as soon as the phone is turned off, assuming a strong passphrase. Live acquisition, however, remains a
possibility if the unlock screen can be bypassed.  Bypassing a lock screen is non-trivial, but possible if an exploit is available
for the device. Encryption is of little use if an attacker can bypass the lock screen, because an attacker can simply copy the
already decrypted files to another device.  This is an especially important observation given that very few people turn off their
cell phone when it is not in use. Disk encryption, as it is implemented in Android, requires an attacker to gain access to a device
without turning it off, but operating system security, rather than cryptography, remains the principle protection. While, at the
time of writing, there are no known exploits against a locked ICS device, an alarming number of bugs have been found over time in
various implementations of the lock screen \cite{hoog, lockscreenbypass0, lockscreenbypass1, lockscreenbypass2}

This chapter describes a novel method which can foil the logical acquisition of an Android device, even if the lock screen is
bypassed. This means that sensitive data cannot be copied off of the phone if the correct password was not entered at the lock
screen. It is likely that a sophisticated attacker could still retrieve the decryption keys from memory, but the method presented
could be extended without too much difficulty to prevent that as well, meaning a running Android device could remain
cryptographically secure any time the device was locked (see chapter \ref{ch:future}). This is accomplished by stacking an
additional cryptographic filesystem - eCryptfs - on top of the normal ext4 filesystem. The eCryptfs module being used
has been modified to incorporate the concept of boundaries, where different portions of the filesystem use different keys, based
upon the user id of the file owner. When the phone is locked, keys for select applications storing sensitive data are removed from
memory, preventing access to those applications.

\section{eCryptfs} 
\label{sec:ecryptfs}
There are two basic approaches to disk encryption: block-based and file-based. Android 4.x uses \texttt{dm-crypt}, which is
block-based, while eCryptfs is file-based.  In a block-based encryption scheme, encryption happens ``below'' the filesystem. The
encryption mechanism is inserted between the filesystem and the block device. When the filesystem goes to write a block of data,
that block is encrypted prior to physically being written to disk. The filesystem is unaware of the encryption. The advantage of
this method is that it is simple, transparent, and encrypts everything on the device. The primary disadvantage is a lack of granular
control. It is difficult, in a block-based encryption scheme, to treat one file any differently than another.  It can be done, but
requires keeping a separate mapping between files and blocks. A cryptographic filesystem, in contrast, performs encryption at the
file level. The data is encrypted \emph{before} it reaches the block device driver. This allows for much greater control over how
files are encrypted, with the primary disadvantages being complexity of implementation and inability to protect swap
space.\footnote{The eCryptfs FAQ contains a more complete comparison between block-based and file-based encryption methods. The
inability to encrypt swap space is not particularly relevant to Android, which typically runs without a swap partition.}

Michael Halcrow was the principal architect of eCryptfs, which extended Erez Zadok's Cryptfs \cite{Halcrow}. It was designed after
the FiST stackable filesystem framework, which allows it to run on top of an existing filesystem, such as ext4. The idea behind
``stacking'' filesystems is an underlying filesystem (ext4 in this case) can be used to provide most of the basic functionality,
while the new features exist in a relatively thin layer on top of that filesystem. From an end-user perspective eCryptfs is almost
completely transparent after initial setup.  A special directory is created that houses private data, and all of the files stored in
this directory will be encrypted on disk. The encrypted directory is then mounted somewhere else as an eCryptfs filesystem, and the files
viewed from the eCryptfs mount point are transparently decrypted. 

Key handling in eCryptfs is convolute, perhaps, but important to understand because the extension to eCryptfs described in this
chapter is simply a modification to the way keys are handled. A number of methods are supported by eCryptfs for handling the private
key material, but this paper is only concerned with the passphrase method of generating keys with Android. When operating normally,
eCryptfs has two tiers of keys. There is the master key, and there are keys which are unique for each file. The file encryption key,
or ``FEK'', is the actual encryption key used to encrypt and decrypt the contents of the file (typically with AES). The FEK is just
a series of randomly generated bytes. When the contents of a file is encrypted, the encryption key for that particular file (the
FEK) is encrypted with the master key, resulting in the ``encrypted file encryption key,'' or EFEK.  The EFEK is stored as metadata
in the header of the encrypted file.  The master key here is the ``file encryption key encryption key,'' or the FEKEK, which can be
abbreviated F(EK)\superscript{2}. Throughout this chapter, what is called the master key is always the key required to unlock the
entire filesystem.  In normal operation the master key is F(EK)\superscript{2}. F(EK)\superscript{2} is hashed, and the signature is
also stored in the header of the file to be encrypted. A list of available keys is maintained for each mount point. When a file is
opened, the key signature or signatures are read out of the headers associated with the file. The list of global keys available for
that mount point is searched for a corresponding F(EK)\superscript{2} signature, and if a corresponding key is found, the EFEK
associated with that file is decrypted, to produce the FEK. The FEK, in turn, is used to decrypt the rest of the file.  This
separation of master and session keys strengthens the filesystem against offline cryptanalysis. Figure \ref{fig:ecryptfsnormal}
shows this process:
\begin{enumerate}
	\item{The user enters a passphrase}
	\item{A utility turns this passphrase into the FEKEK, or F(EK)\superscript{2}, which is stored in the kernel}
	\item{F(EK)\superscript{2} is hashed, and that signature is registered as being available for a given mount point}
	\item{A new encryption key, FEK, is randomly generated for each file}
	\item{The FEK associated with a file is encrypted with F(EK)\superscript{2} to create the EFEK, and stored in the header for the file}
	\item{The signature of F(EK)\superscript{2} is also stored in the header of the file}
	\item{When a file is decrypted, the stored F(EK)\superscript{2} signature is compared against the list of signatures for the mount point,
		and if a match is found, the appropriate key is retrieved and the file is decrypted.}
\end{enumerate}

\begin{figure}[ht] \begin{center}
\includegraphics[scale=0.4]{eCryptfsNormalOperation.png} \end{center}
\caption{eCryptfs Normal Key Operation} \label{fig:ecryptfsnormal} \end{figure}
\section{eCryptfs Boundary Mode}

The modifications to eCryptfs presented in this chapter are inspired by the work of Leo Dorrendorf on increasing the resilience of
encrypted filesystems to memory-based attacks \cite{Dorrendorf2011}. The keying method of eCryptfs has be changed to add a
notion of security boundaries between different parts of the filesystem, toward the end of providing a usable mobile device even
while portions of the filesystem cannot be accessed. In the traditional keying mode for eCryptfs, the master key is
F(EK)\superscript{2}, and it must always remain memory resident, for if it is removed then no files can be accessed whatsoever.
Any device will quickly cease to operate in such a situation. A third, interstitial tier of keys, here called ``boundary'' keys, has
been introduced. When the device is locked, this allows the master key to be removed from memory, along with any unnecessary
boundary keys, leaving accessible only the portion of the filesystem necessary to keep the device operational.

The question of where to draw boundaries immediately arises. The Android security architecture is designed, first and foremost,
around isolating application access. From a storage perspective, the overriding goal is to prevent a malicious application from
accessing data that it should not, which includes preventing access to data associated with other applications.  The official
documentation on security and permissions describes it this way: \begin{quote} A central design point of the Android security
architecture is that no application, by default, has permission to perform any operations that would adversely impact other
applications, the operating system, or the user.  This includes reading or writing the user's private data (such as contacts or
e-mails), reading or writing another application's files, performing network access, keeping the device awake, etc.
\hspace{\fill}\cite{securitydoc} \end{quote} It therefore seems natural to reinforce the security mechanisms already in place with
cryptographic boundaries.  One detail of the Android security architecture is particularly useful for this purpose: \begin{quote} At
install time, Android gives each package a distinct Linux user ID. The identity remains constant for the duration of the package's
life on that device. On a different device, the same package may have a different UID; what matters is that each package has a
distinct UID on a given device.  \hspace{\fill}\cite{securitydoc} \end{quote} This UID is used to establish file ownership for
applications, which is convenient because it means that each UID can be associated with a boundary key. If that boundary key is
removed from memory along with the master key, then even an attacker who has access to the running device will not be able to
decrypt the data associated with that application.

Boundary keys are generated by concatenating the master key with the UID of the file, and then hashing the result.  Boundary keys
are used as F(EK)\superscript{2}, and the master key generated from the user's passphrase becomes F(EK)\superscript{3}. Currently
only 128 bit keys hashed with MD5 are supported because that was the most accessible key length and algorithm already available
within eCryptfs, but it would not be a significant amount of work to expand the supported set of key sizes and hash algorithms. As
seen in figure \ref{fig:ecryptfsboundary}, a list of boundary keys is kept along side the list of master keys (internally referred
to as global authentication tokens).  When a file is opened, the boundary key for the relevant UID is retrieved. If the boundary key
cannot be located, but the master key is available, then the boundary key is derived from the master.

\begin{figure}[ht] \begin{center}
\includegraphics[scale=0.4]{eCryptfsBoundaryMode.png}\end{center}
\caption{eCryptfs Boundary Mode} \label{fig:ecryptfsboundary} \end{figure}

\section{Supporting eCryptfs Boundaries in Android}

\subsection{The Android Boot Process}
How eCryptfs might be integrated into the Android platform cannot be understood without first taking a quick look at the internals
of the Android boot process, particularly as it relates to disk volumes. During startup, the ``bootloader'' is the first piece of
code to execute that is not hardwired into a device. Unlike a desktop Linux system, where open-source bootloaders such as GRUB are
used, phone manufacturers typically use proprietary bootloaders. While the sources for these bootloaders are not open to inspection,
the principles they operate on are well known. The bootloader, for at least the Nexus series of devices, can be interacted with via
the \texttt{fastboot} protocol. The Android Open Source Project includes the source for the \texttt{fastboot} utility, which can be
used to unlock the bootloader, flash images, and perform other functions that only the bootloader can do.  During normal startup the
primary task of the bootloader is to load the Android kernel into memory and pass control of the system over to it. 

The Android kernel will initialize the hardware and prepare the device itself for use. On an Android device, the \texttt{boot}
partition is separated from the \texttt{system} and \texttt{userdata} partitions (see chapter \ref{ch:forensics}). The boot
partition contains the kernel and a ``ramdisk.''  The ramdisk is a small filesystem that contains the core binaries and
configuration files needed to start the system. In all Linux-based systems, Android included, \texttt{init} is the ``grandmother''
of all processes \cite{EneaBoot}. Everything outside of the kernel is launched by \texttt{init} directly or by a process that was
previously started by \texttt{init}. The Android \texttt{init} process is specialized for Android and does not coincide with
\texttt{init} as it is implemented on any other Linux distribution, and hereafter \texttt{init} refers to \texttt{init} as it is
implemented in Android.  The configuration for \texttt{init} is held in two files on the ramdisk, \texttt{init.rc} and
\texttt{init.PRODUCTNAME.rc} where PRODUCTNAME is the internal name for the board on the device. The Nexus S, for example, is termed
``Herring,'' so \texttt{init} looks at \texttt{init.rc} and \texttt{init.herring.rc}.\footnote{A note on naming: the device and the
board for the device are named separately, but necessarily correlate. So, the Nexus One has a device name of ``passion,'' but a
board/kernel name of ``mahimahi.'' The Nexus S has a device name of ``crespo'' or ``crespo4g,'' depending on whether it is a Nexus S
or a Nexus S 4G, but they both have a board/kernel name of ``Herring.''} These configuration files are written in a script syntax
specific to \texttt{init} that supports basic functions which should be familiar, such as \texttt{mount}, \texttt{chmod}, and
\texttt{chown}, as well as more advanced functionality such as triggers based upon system properties.  Triggers in \texttt{init}
will be examined more thoroughly in section \ref{ssec:encryptionboot}. These scripts set up the filesystem layout of the device and
start all of the system services that make up Android as the user knows it. A typical line in an \texttt{init} script might look
like table which tells \texttt{init} to mount the \texttt{system} partition with the mount flags \texttt{wait}, and the mount
options \texttt{ro}. This is very similar to a standard mount command from a shell, but the syntax is slightly different. This will
be translated by \texttt{init} into an actual mount call to the kernel. 
\begin{table}
\lstinputlisting{tables/init-mount}
\caption{Mounting a Filesystem from within \texttt{init.herring.rc}}
\label{tab:initmount}
\end{table}


\subsection{Booting an Encrypted Device} \label{ssec:encryptionboot}

As described in the documentation for the implementation of encryption in Honeycomb\footnote{Honeycomb was the release of Android
immediately preceding Ice Cream Sandwich, and available for tablets only. There is no official documentation for the encryption
mechanism of Ice Cream Sandwich, but it functions as described in the Honeycomb document.} \cite{honeycombcrypt}, most of the heavy
lifting related to handling encrypted devices is performed by \texttt{vold}, the Android volume daemon. The volume daemon is the
system service responsible for keeping track of storage on an Android device. The primary mechanism for \texttt{init} to communicate
with the outside world, including \texttt{vold}, is the notion of a \emph{system property}.  Android has an elaborate property system
which is outside the scope of this discussion, but essentially \texttt{init} maintains a shared memory region where properties can
be set and get. This shared region is visible to every process on the system \cite{propertysystem}. These ``native'' system
properties are distinct from system properties in Java, though native system properties are available to Java code via
JNI\footnote{JNI is the ``Java Native Interface,'' which is used to execute native code, typically C++, from within Java. Android
makes extensive use of JNI.}. The Honeycomb implementation document describes how these properties are used during boot with an
encrypted device:

\begin{quote} When init fails to mount /data, it assumes the filesystem is encrypted, and sets several properties: ro.crypto.state =
``encrypted" vold.decrypt = 1. It then mounts /data on a tmpfs ramdisk, using parameters it picks up from ro.crypto.tmpfs\_options,
which is set in init.rc.  \ldots The framework starts up, and sees that vold.decrypt is set to ``1". This tells the framework that it
is booting on a tmpfs /data disk, and it needs to get the user password. First, however, it needs to make sure that the disk was
properly encrypted. It sends the command ``cryptfs cryptocomplete" to vold, and vold returns 0 if encryption was completed
successfully, or -1 on internal error, or -2 if encryption was not completed successfully.  

\hspace{\fill}\cite{honeycombcrypt}
\end{quote}

To summarize, \texttt{init} always attempts to mount \texttt{/data} as if it were unencrypted. This fails if the device is
encrypted, and then sets the appropriate system properties to denote the results of the attempted mount. When the framework starts,
\texttt{init} reads those properties, and calls \texttt{vold} if necessary. When called upon, it is the responsibility of
\texttt{vold} to handle setup for the \texttt{dm-crypt} device, making sure it gets mounted in the clear at \texttt{/data}, while it
is the responsibility of the minimal framework to accept a password from the user and pass it to \texttt{vold}. Once \texttt{/data}
is successfully mounted, the rest of the framework services are started and the system is ready for use.

\subsection{Supporting eCryptfs in \texttt{vold}} \label{sec:ecryptfsvold} Just as the brains for handling \texttt{dm-crypt} were
placed in \texttt{vold} by Google, here all of the support for handling eCryptfs volumes is also placed in \texttt{vold}. Normally,
eCryptfs ships with a fully developed set of userspace utilities to help with key and volume management. Rather than cross-compiling
the full set of utilities, the decision was made by the author to build only a minimal set of eCryptfs userspace functionality into
an external library, available in the source tree accompanying this paper at \texttt{external/libecryptfs}.  The eCryptfs code was
mostly kept intact, with the exception of the hash function. The stock utilities use Mozilla's \texttt{libnss} to perform the
necessary hashes, but Android does not have \texttt{libnss} and cross-compilation is non-trivial. Android does, however, ship with
the OpenSSL crypto libraries, which include a full set of hash functions. Those functions were used in lieu of \texttt{libnss}.
Additionally, Android does not ship with keyutils, which is the userspace library for interacting with the kernel key retention
service.  This library is required by \texttt{libecryptfs} to insert the key into the kernel. The keyutils library is included in
the source tree accompanying this paper at \texttt{external/libkeyutils}. 

Normally, if an eCryptfs volume is mounted by hand, a user generates a key from a passphrase and adds it to a keyring in the kernel
by using \texttt{ecryptfs-add-passphrase}.  This key is used as the master key for the eCryptfs volume. On Android the same
procedure is followed, but \texttt{vold} replaces \texttt{ecryptfs-add-passphrase}, and the signature of the key is recorded in the
system property \texttt{vold.ecryptfs\_options}, which actually contains the literal mount options required to mount an eCryptfs
volume on the device. Table \ref{tab:generate-key} shows the actual code in \texttt{vold} which calls \texttt{libecryptfs} to insert
the key into the kernel. 

\begin{table} 
\lstinputlisting{tables/generate-key} 
\caption{Function added to \texttt{vold} for eCryptfs Key Generation}
\label{tab:generate-key}
\end{table}

The \texttt{vold} function \texttt{cryptfs\_check\_passwd}, which is used to verify that a password is correct for mounting an
encrypted volume, was then modified to include a call to the new \texttt{cryptfs\_generate\_ecryptfs\_key}. Thus, when a user enters
their password to decrypt the device at boot, the corresponding eCryptfs mount key is inserted into the keyring at the same time.

The Android kernel must also support eCryptfs and key retention, which the default Android kernel does not. Enabling support for
these options is easy, however, as it simply involves enabling the appropriate options in the kernel configuration, building the
kernel, and placing it into the appropriate device folder within AOSP, prior to building the Android system. The code for this paper
includes the modified kernel source in the \texttt{kernel} subdirectory, and the compiled kernel can be found in
\texttt{device/samsung/crespo} (crespo because a Nexus S was used for testing).

\subsection{Enabling eCryptfs Encryption} Normally, an Android 4.0 device is encrypted in-place, that is the existing data is
encrypted without being moved, but this is a difficult operation with eCryptfs. In-place encryption is a relatively easy operation
with block level encryption, as the device can be unmounted and each block encrypted where it lay. On the other hand, a multitude of
problems present themselves when the issue of encrypting existing data files with eCryptfs is contemplated.  The typical process for
encrypting existing files with eCryptfs is to create an empty eCryptfs mount and then copy the existing files to the eCryptfs
filesystem.  This could be done, but it would come with the requirement that no more than half the data partition be in use prior to
encryption. Even if that constraint were accepted, Android does not include a native file copy utility.\footnote{Android
\texttt{init} does have a file copy, but it is incredibly simple and would not suffice for the purpose at hand.} Copy functionality
could be written, of course, but a robust file copy is not as simple as it may seem. Instead of reinventing the wheel, Busybox could
be included in the system build, but then core OS functions are relying on shell scripts. In short, encrypting existing files with
eCryptfs on Android is possible, but appeared to be more trouble than it was worth.

There is another option, however. When a device is encrypted, the command ``cryptfs enablecrypto inplace'' is sent to \texttt{vold},
which instructs it to perform an in-place encryption of the \texttt{userdata} partition. Yet \texttt{vold} also supports the command
``cryptfs enablecrypto wipe,'' though is not enabled in the official Android release. The Android mount service, which is the Java
service that makes the call to \texttt{vold}, can be easily modified to send the ``wipe'' incantation instead of ``inplace.'' It is
important to note that this does not securely wipe the device. It simply recreates the filesystem. Doing a secure wipe at this
point, if possible, would certainly be desirable, but it has not implemented at this time. Any data that existed prior to encrypting
the device should be treated as if it still exists. Furthermore, the entire data partition is not encrypted with
eCryptfs. Only \texttt{/data/data} is encrypted, as a demonstration. This includes all of the application data on the phone, but
certainly not all of the available forensic artifacts.

For the phone to boot after \texttt{/data/data} has been encrypted, \texttt{init} needs to be instructed to mount \texttt{/data/data}
as an eCryptfs volume. This can be done with one line in \texttt{init.rc} at the end of the \texttt{post-fs-data} section. The
\texttt{post-fs-data} section is executed as a trigger by \texttt{init}. Triggers in \texttt{init} respond to system properties
being set to a certain value. When an encrypted phone boots, after \texttt{vold} has successfully mounted the encrypted partition and
the master key has been inserted into the keyring, the system property \texttt{vold.decrypt} is set to the value
\texttt{trigger\_post\_fs\_data}, which signals to \texttt{init} that the \texttt{post-fs-data} section of \texttt{init.rc} should
be run. Triggers are easy to implement, and this one is shown in table \ref{tab:post-fs-data-trigger}.  
\begin{table}
\lstinputlisting{tables/post-fs-data-trigger} 
\caption{Trigger in \texttt{init} to setup decrypted data partition} 
\label{tab:post-fs-data-trigger}
\end{table} 
An attempt is made every boot to mount \texttt{/data/data} as an eCryptfs volume, and if the volume is not encrypted it will just
silently fail. 

A final modification was necessary to correctly retrieve the mount options for mounting the eCryptfs volume. This is complicated by
the fact that eCryptfs expects the key signature of the master key to be passed as a mount option.  Including this kind of dynamic
behavior would be difficult in \texttt{init.rc}, so it was placed in \texttt{init} proper. This is the reason why
\texttt{cryptfs\_generate\_ecryptfs\_key} stored the necessary mount options in a system property, as discussed in section
\ref{sec:ecryptfsvold}. The mount function in \texttt{init} has been modified to read the mount options from this system property if
the filesystem type is ``ecryptfs,'' as shown in table \ref{tab:init-ecryptfs-mount}.

\begin{table} 
\lstinputlisting{tables/init-ecryptfs-mount}
\caption{Reading eCryptfs mount options from system property} 
\label{tab:init-ecryptfs-mount}
\end{table}

\section{Removing Keys}

The previous work to encrypt the data partition of the phone with separate keys for each application serves little
purpose if the boundary keys are not removed when the device is locked. This section describes how a press of the power button on a
device can trigger the removal of the master key and any specified boundary keys. This demonstration does not sufficiently sanitize
freed memory to completely prevent key extraction through live analysis (see chapter \ref{ch:future} for more details).

\subsection{Messaging in eCryptfs}
 
There is already a messaging system built into eCryptfs for handling communication between userspace and kernelspace. Normally,
eCryptfs supports running a daemon called \texttt{ecryptfsd} that can be called upon to perform tasks outside of the kernel.
Typically, \texttt{ecryptfsd} is used to allow encryption of eCryptfs volumes with a public key and decryption with a private key.
When an encrypted file is opened, eCryptfs reads a public key out of the file header, instead of an EFEK, and then calls out to
\texttt{ecryptfsd} to retrieve the private key material \cite{ecryptfspki}. More generally, \texttt{ecryptfsd} provides a way 
for the keying mechanism of eCryptfs to be extended.  Chapter \ref{ch:future} includes a discussion of how boundary keys might be
re-implemented using \texttt{ecryptfsd}, affording a considerable increase in flexibility.

Messaging within eCryptfs works by reading and writing messages to the device handle \texttt{/dev/ecryptfs}, which is registered as a
``miscellaneous'' device. A miscellaneous devices is a small driver implemented to support a miscellaneous purpose. In this case the
purpose is communication with \texttt{ecryptfsd}. \footnote{Previously, \texttt{NETLINK} messages were used, which is a socket-like
mechanism for communication with the kernel, but that method has lost favor within eCryptfs.} As the current implementation of
boundary keys does not rely on calling out to \texttt{ecryptfsd} for key computation, running \texttt{ecryptfsd} is not necessary,
and the messaging system can still be used by writing to \texttt{/dev/ecryptfs} directly. 

Three new messages have been defined: \texttt{ECRYPTFS\_MSG\_CLEARMASTER}, \texttt{ECRYPTFS\_MSG\_CLEARBOUNDARY}, and
\texttt{ECRYPTFS\_MSG\_REGMASTER}, hereafter referred to as \texttt{clearmaster}, \texttt{clearboundary}, and \texttt{regmaster},
respectively. The payload of a \texttt{clearmaster} message needs to be the path to the mount point for which the master key should
be cleared, as each mounted eCryptfs filesystem is keyed independently. When \texttt{clearmaster} is received by the kernel, all
references to the master key - F(EK)\superscript{3} - within the kernel are removed from memory. This will \emph{not} remove the
actual key from the user's keyring. It is the responsibility of userspace to remove the key from the keyring, which in the Android
implementation is handled by \texttt{vold}.  Technically, what \texttt{clearmaster} does is walk the list of global authentication
tokens associated with a given mount point, zero them all with \texttt{memset}, and remove them from the list.  At this point the
key itself must be removed from the user's keyring or all files will remain decryptable. One \texttt{clearboundary} message for each
boundary key being cleared should be sent after the master key has been cleared. If the boundary keys are cleared prior to clearing
the master key, then it is possible the boundary keys could be recalculated for a given UID. The \texttt{clearboundary}
message payload should start with four bytes specifying the UID of the boundary to clear, immediately followed by a string
specifying the mount point of the eCryptfs filesystem. Boundary keys are cleared in a fashion similar to master keys: the list
associated with the mount point is walked, each structure is zeroed, and the items removed.  In this implementation, no boundary
keys are held in userspace memory, so they have actually been removed as soon as the message is sent to the kernel. 

In order for key removal to function appropriately, it was necessary to force eCryptfs to recalculate the cryptographic context for
each file as it is opened, which does have some impact on performance. Normally the FEK is stored in a lookaside cache after the
file is opened, but that allows access to the file even after the master and boundary keys have been cleared. The \texttt{release}
function in eCryptfs has been modified to zero out the FEK upon file close.

Within Android, these messages are sent by \texttt{vold}, relying on the same stripped-down \texttt{libecryptfs} mentioned
previously.  A set of new functions has been defined in \texttt{vold} that receive messages from the Java-based mount service and
relay them to the kernel. These functions, in turn, are exposed as \texttt{vold} commands that are accessible from the Android
framework. Any application with permission to control \texttt{vold} can clear or re-register keys by executing one of the following
commands: \texttt{cryptfs clearmaster}, \texttt{cryptfs clearboundary <uid>}, or \texttt{cryptfs regmaster}. Note that while the
kernel messages require a mount point to be passed, the \texttt{vold} commands do not. This implementation assumes that
\texttt{/data/data} is the only mounted eCryptfs volume. It would be trivial to extend the \texttt{vold} commands to support
multiple encrypted volumes Additionally, the \texttt{clearmaster} command in \texttt{vold} unlinks the master key from the keyring
handled by the kernel key retention service, which contains the actual private key material for the eCryptfs mount. This key
material was originally generated from the unlock passphrase and stored in the keyring by \texttt{vold}.

When an Android phone goes to sleep, either because the user pressed the power button or because the inactivity timeout has
triggered, the \texttt{ACTION\_SCREEN\_OFF} intent\footnote{Intents are messages within the Android framework. See
\texttt{developer.android.com} for details.} is broadcast throughout the device. Any listeners that have registered to receive this
intent are notified. In order to accommodate key removal, the mount service has been registered to receive this intent and calls
\texttt{cryptfs clearmaster} along with \texttt{cryptfs clearboundary} when it is received. Finally, any applications for which
boundary keys are being cleared are forced to stop, ensuring that the application is required to hit disk the next time it starts.
Otherwise, the application remains in a paused state, and could be resumed despite the keys being removed. For demonstration
purposes, the \texttt{clearboundary} call has a hard-coded UID, which is not terribly useful, but serves as a placeholder where
custom logic could be added to determine what applications have data that should be protected, as seen in table
\ref{tab:mountservice}. Ideally, the list would be accessible through a configuration interface presented to the user, but that is
work for the future. 

\begin{table}
\lstinputlisting{tables/mountservice.java}
\caption{Clearing Keys from the Mount Service}
\label{tab:mountservice}
\end{table}

When a device is unlocked, the master key for the volume is recalculated, inserted into the key retention service, and registered
as a global authentication token with eCryptfs by sending a \texttt{regmaster} message to the kernel module, with the signature of
the key that needs to be registered. 

\subsection{Alice Sends Bob Flowers}
\label{sec:alicebob}
The whole thing is complex, to be sure. A short, hypothetical example may help illustrate the purpose and process of eCryptfs boundary mode.  

Alice would like to send Bob some flowers. Unfortunately, flowers have been recently outlawed, along with all other outwardly
displays of affection. A busy woman, Alice tends to make lists for herself so that she does not forget important things, like
sending Bob flowers. She is heavily invested in \emph{ColorNote}, a note-taking application, which does offer password protection
and encrypted backups, but does not encrypt notes on the device. A closed source application, encryption cannot be added without
considerable effort. Alice is worried that her phone will be taken, her to-do list will be discovered, and that she will be locked
away when the government sees that she has been buying flowers. This fear was stoked by a document recently uncovered with a FOIA
request, revealing that at least one government was looking at to-do lists during mobile seizures, as shown in figure \ref{fig:dhs}
\cite{dhsfoia}. Alice wants to prevent someone with one-time physical access to her device, should it be confiscated, from seeing
the contents of her to-do list. Android 4.x would protect her to-do list if the phone is captured while powered off, but it has
been rumored the government is hoarding OS exploits against phones, among other things. If the government can bypass the lock screen
on her phone, then it is all over for the poor lady. Alice would like to protect her to-do list even in the event that her phone is
seized and the lock screen can be bypassed, such that a ``logical acquisition,'' in forensics parlance, would be fruitless. What is
Alice to do?

\begin{figure}[ht] \begin{center}
\includegraphics[scale=0.6]{dhs.png}\end{center}
\caption{DHS Mobile Forensics Training} \label{fig:dhs} \end{figure}

Alice begins running an Android distribution that supports eCryptfs boundary mode. She configures the device such that the boundary
key for ColorNote is cleared every time the phone is locked or goes to to sleep. When she is using the phone, her private to-do list
is easily accessible. After the keys have been removed, the application fails to start entirely unless the phone has been properly
unlocked. Attempting to access the databases through \texttt{adb} simply returns \texttt{I/O error}. While this does not, by any
means, provide perfect security, Alice has forced the issue out of the realm of traditional post-mortem forensics. Either live
memory analysis needs to be performed, or an out-of-band attack needs to be executed, such as determining the passphrase from the
smudge patterns on the screen, or simply extracting the key from Alice directly through a rubber-hose attack.
